---
slug: 2020-01-08-client
layout: newsletter
---

## Introducing Anomagram — An Interactive Visualization of Autoencoders, Built with Tensorflow.js

Across many business use cases that generate data, it is frequently desirable to automatically identify data 
samples that deviate from “normal”. In many cases, these deviations are indicative of issues that need to be addressed. 
For example, an abnormally high cash withdrawal from a previously unseen location may be indicative of fraud. 
An abnormally high CPU temperature may be indicative of impending hardware failure. The task of finding these anomalies 
is broadly referred to as Anomaly Detection, and many excellent approaches have been proposed (clustering-based approaches, 
nearest neighbors, density estimation, etc.). However, as data become high dimensional, with complex patterns, 
existing approaches (linear models which mostly focus on univariate data) can be unwieldy to apply. For such problems, 
deep learning can help.

In [a recent post on Medium](https://medium.com/@victor.dibia/anomagram-433d00db7261), I introduced [Anomagram]
(https://victordibia.github.io/anomagram/#/), an interactive visualization of how autoencoders can be applied to the task of 
anomaly detection. I created it as both a learning tool, and a prototype example of what an ML product interface could 
look like (of course, what I covered is just a small slice of the entire process).

You can view the full demo of the prototype [here](https://victordibia.github.io/anomagram/), and find the project source code
[here](https://github.com/victordibia/anomagram).
