---
title: 'Fall Internships: Research Engineering and Prototype + Data Visualization
  [Filled]'
date: 2016-07-25 17:30:43 Z
tags:
- announcement
- internship
layout: post
tumblr_url: http://blog.fastforwardlabs.com/post/147953672348/fall-internships-research-engineering-and
post_type: Announcement
---

<p><em>These positions have been filled. We are not accepting further applications. For announcements of future opportunities, please <a href="http://www.fastforwardlabs.com/#contact">subscribe to our mailing list</a>.</em></p>

<p>We’re excited to announce two fall internship opportunities, which are open to current undergraduate and graduate students, as well as recent graduates and career changers seeking an internship position. To apply, send your resume and cover letter to <a href="mailto:jobs@fastforwardlabs.com">jobs@fastforwardlabs.com</a>.</p><p>Keep reading for details on responsibilities, qualifications, and perks.</p><!-- more --><h2>Research Engineering Intern</h2><p><b>Key Responsibilities:</b><br/>You’ll read current computer science research papers and generally stay up on what’s interesting in the field (we focus on data and machine learning but have wide interests). You’ll then synthesize new solutions and algorithms in these areas, build prototype systems that demonstrate the feasibility of these approaches, and contribute your written perspective to our published reports. You’ll help bring our research to life by working on real-world data science problems for our clients and writing technical posts for our blog. Primarily, we want someone interested in making stuff, and who is up for learning whatever they need to learn to get those things made.<br/></p><p>This opportunity is open to current undergraduate and graduate students, as well as recent graduates and career changers seeking an internship position.<br/></p><p><b>Skills and Qualifications:</b><br/>We primarily work in Python for research and data analysis but are always open to the best technologies for a given problem.</p><p>We expect you to be a strong programmer, with a good background in math and statistics, and excellent communication skills. Prior experience with machine learning is a plus.</p><h2>Prototype and Data Visualization Intern</h2><p><b>Key Responsibilities:</b><br/>You will help to conceive and build prototypes and data visualizations demonstrating the capabilities of Fast Forward Labs technology research projects. Each quarter we focus on a different near-future technology (past topics include image object recognition and natural language generation). To communicate the value of these technologies to our clients we make product-style prototypes, data visualizations, and reports with explanatory illustrations. You would help with the creation of those materials. By the end of the internship you will be responsible for creating your own demo on, or visualization of, an aspect of the technology we focus on for our next report. You will also be responsible for posting updates to our company blog about your work.</p><p>This opportunity is open to current undergraduate and graduate students, as well as recent graduates and career changers seeking an internship position.<br/></p><p><b>Skills and Qualifications<br/></b>Our ideal candidate is interested in both code and design. Familiarity with HTML and Javascript, which we use to code our prototypes and visualizations, is required. Experience in design and visualization is a big plus. If you’re a programmer looking to move more into design or a designer who has moved into programming this could be a great fit for you. Primarily, we want someone interested in making stuff, and who is up for learning whatever they need to learn to get those things made.</p><h2>About Fast Forward Labs</h2><p><b>Company Overview</b><br/>We value thoughtfulness, learning new things, creativity, and diverse perspectives. Fast Forward Labs is a research company that helps organizations recognize and develop new product and business opportunities through emerging machine intelligence technologies. We offer a research subscription service and advisory services to small and large companies in a wide set of industries.<br/></p><p>To learn more about us, read our <a href="http://blog.fastforwardlabs.com/post/92438955263/hello-fast-forward-labs">blog post</a> announcing the company and this <a href="http://www.forbes.com/sites/danwoods/2014/09/09/fast-forward-labs-wants-to-be-your-nathan-myrhvold/">Forbes profile of FFL</a>.</p><p>View some of our past prototypes: <a href="http://www.pictograph.us/#/">Pictograph</a>, <a href="http://www.fastforwardlabs.com/brief/">Brief Preview</a>, and a <a href="http://www.fastforwardlabs.com/luhn/">Luhn Method Summarization Demo</a>.</p><p><b>Locations</b><br/>Our office is currently on the lower east side in New York City, though we are likely moving to Brooklyn (near Barclays Center) at the end of the summer. We offer a flexible work schedule in a collaborative and creative environment. <br/></p><p><b>Type of Employment</b><br/>These are paid internships on site in our NYC office. We expect you to be available for a minimum of 20 hours per week, for a term of two to six months, beginning in Fall 2016.<br/></p>
